---
title: "This Week I Learned #3"
feedId: journal/this-week-i-learned-3/
subtitle: Less reading this week… because more composing.
date: 2020-05-08T17:22:00-0600
summary: >
    Feminism, capitalism, and AI; politics, journalism, and sexual assault; software rewrites; and Christianity and human dignity.
qualifiers:
    audience: >
        People who like reading and learning, on any of a wide array of subjects! (There’s probably *something* on this list for you!)
    epistemic: >
        Learning in public!
tags:
    - This Week I Learned
    - things I learned
    - feminism
    - capitalism
    - AI
    - politics
    - journalism
    - theology
    - Christianity
    - human dignity
    - software development
    - learning

---

From my reading this week:

- <i>Feminism, capitalism, and AI.</i> In [The Wife Glitch](https://thebaffler.com/outbursts/the-wife-glitch-schaffer), Jennifer Schaffer argues that modern tech is about valuing “women’s work”… as a profit center for men. Lots of “capitalism does ” kinds of language, which undercuts a lot of the otherwise interesting points of the piece about how many specifically *domestic tasks* have been tackled by the tech renaissance. A huge blind spot, too: lots of very traditionally/stereotypically male tasks are *also* coming under fire, and targets of machine learning/AI programs (e.g. driving). Still, the argument was engaging and I’m not sad I read it, even if I ultimately disagree with her.

- <i>Politics, journalism, sexual assualt.</i> Laura McGann explains at Vox just how difficult a story to report the Tara Reade accusations against Joe Biden have been. One of the things I appreciate about this piece in particular is that it highlights just how hard *good* journalism is. McGann explains some of the lengths she went to in her attempt to chase down information (and to help Reade prove her case if it’s true), and it’s a *lot*. Worth a read for that perspective alone. Also worth a read for the way it *appropriately* complicates the narrative around Reade and Biden—neither in partisan fashion leaping to Biden’s defense, nor blaming Reade for being an “imperfect witness,” nor even passing judgment on the case: just laying out the facts as well as McGann can.

- <i>Software rewrites.</i> [This piece](https://increment.com/software-architecture/exit-the-haunted-forest/) (by John Millikin, on Stripe’s <cite>Increment</cite>) was a great dive into when and how to tackle actual software rewrites. One of the interesting things about this is that, while it argued against one of the long-standing pieces of wisdom in our industry—[Joel Spolsky’s famous argument against rewrites](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2000/04/06/things-you-should-never-do-part-i/ "Things You Should Never Do, Part I")—it’s arguably just restating Martin Fowler’s post from just a few years later about [how to do rewrites well](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/StranglerFigApplication.html "StranglerFigApplication"). Meta takeaway: this industry is pretty bad about actually learning the things we need to learn. (Maybe other industries are equally bad; I just have no insight into them.)

- <i>Christianity and human dignity.</i> I don’t love D. B. Hart in general: I think he’s something of a blowhard. But [this piece](https://churchlifejournal.nd.edu/articles/human-dignity-was-a-rarity-before-christianity/ "Human Dignity Was a Rarity Before Christianity") (from back in 2017) was excellent: an articulation of just how profoundly Christianity has reshaped our notion of human dignity. Christianity was not the *origin* of these ideas, of course: Judaism had been proclaiming them for millennia by the time Christianity exploded from being a small messianic Jewish sect into the world religion that it became in the first few centuries A.D. But precisely that explosion transformed our whole approach to humanity. *Everyone*, we now affirm, deserves to be treated with equal dignity, has inherently equal worth and personhood—not as a matter of rank or family, but by dint of being human. You don’t have to be a Christian or even think much of what we Christians believe about the universe to appreciate that change (though I’d suggest that if you *do* appreciate that change, maybe consider what we think about the universe?).

Two other notes, in closing:

- I learned a *ton* this week about [Dorico](https://new.steinberg.net/dorico/), a bit about virtual instruments and how to tweak them, and a little bit—by way of experience, that best of teachers!—about orchestration. Composing all week was a lot of fun, even if I didn’t get quite as far as I might have liked.

- It strikes me that perhaps I should (re)title this series “Things I Read This Week” instead of “Things I Learned” since that’s *actually* how it’s functioning. Thoughts? [Email me!](mailto:hello@chriskrycho.com)

*[AI]: artificial intelligence