Title: Bundling!
Date: 2014-05-13 14:35
Author: Chris Krycho
Summary: The world of ebook pricing is sometimes a bit crazy. A smart bundling strategy might make it a bit less so.
Template: formats/republish
original_url: http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/web/bundling/

["Why do we have to choose between print and digital?"][dbw] asked Richard
Curtis at Digital Book World last week, before tackling the topic of
bundling---getting ebooks at reduced cost or even free when buying a physical
copy of the book. Drawing an analogy from music purchases that have moved in the
same direction, he suggests that publishers *ought* to be bundling, and then
poses the query: When you purchase a print book you should be able to get the
e-book for...

1.  the full combined retail prices of print and e-book editions
2.  an additional 50% of the retail price of the print edition
3.  an additional 25% of the retail price of the print edition
4.  $1.00 more than the retail price of the print edition
5.  free

He suggests that this proves to be something of a conundrum for decision-makers
in the publishing industry. With respect, and while recognizing that it probably
*feels* like a conundrum to the publishers, I think the answer is really quite
simple. Publishers can dramatically increase their profits, and do it in a way
that readers will *love*. (This is the part where you call me crazy. Up next is
the part where I show you why I'm not.)

All or nothing
--------------

First, we should note that while readers would always choose (e) and publishers
would love it if they could get away with (a), the reality is that both of these
leave one party out in the cold. Publishers need readers, and readers need
publishers. Publishers need readers or they die. Readers need publishers as
providers of quality content---not only as the gatekeepers but also as
polishers who take good books and make them great. Any system that will pan out
well must therefore respect *both* sides of that equation. Both (a) and (e) fail
that test immediately.

In the case of (a), the consumer can rightly point out that the cost of
distribution of a book is minimal, trivial even, in the grand scheme of book
production. That goes double for ebooks: the cost of running a server is a
pittance compared to the cost of writing, editing, and proofing a book. "So,"
any smart reader says, "I've already paid for the book. Why should I have to pay
*just as much again* for the ebook?"

In the case of (e), the consumer is getting something of real value---the
ebook, with its associated portability, the ability to create [communal
interactions][craigmod] around the content through shared marginalia, and so
forth---but without recognizing any infrastructure costs this poses to the
publisher. As always, there is no free lunch, and that is as it should be.[^1]
The worker deserves his wages, and that includes the editor who turns a
manuscript into ebook form---especially for *good* ebooks, which entail a great
deal of work beyond simply running the print manuscript through a conversion
script. That involves real people's time, and therefore costs real money.

Neither of these options, then, is ultimately good for the market. The readers
will rightly reject paying the full price again for a book in a different form;
they've been conditioned by too many interactions on the internet not to
recognize that digital transmission of files the size of a book is, while not
costless, not costly either. On the other hand, publishers still need to make
money, and they do sink real time and money into the ebook---not at the
distribution point, but in the infrastructure involved in the preparation of the
manuscript and readying it for digital and physical publication.

Again: publishers need readers and readers need publishers.

Percentage games
----------------

Percentage-based cuts---like Curtis' options (b) and (c)---are much more
sensible and reasonable from the perspective of both the consumer and the
publisher. In each of these cases, the publisher is granting that the customer
has already made a purchase---perhaps a significant one, in the case of a
hardcover fiction book. Indeed, when we move out into the realm of reference
books or textbooks, the consumer has already given the publisher quite a lot of
money. Thus, options (b) and (c) are much friendlier to the consumer than choice
(a), while still affording the publisher some profits, unlike (e). This is
clearly a step in the right direction.

The percentage option quickly runs into issues when we start thinking about how
such a scheme would work in practice, though. Is it 25% of the hardcover but 50%
of the paperback, so that the publisher can recoup more of the costs? In this
scheme, it is difficult to match the actual cost of the ebook sale to its
relative value compared to the physical copy. Moreover, it's difficult to
standardize. When purchasing a textbook at $150, should someone have to pay
another $37.50 or $75 to have a digital copy? It seems unlikely that preparing
an ebook of a textbook is really 5-6 times more costly than the preparation of a
fiction ebook, which on a percentage basis would come out around $6.50 or $13
for the hardcover at those rates, or $2 or $4 for paperbacks.

Equally important: *will* people pay that much for a digital copy? Publishers
may want to study the question in depth by testing the market, but this is a
waste of time. The answer is obvious to anyone under the age of 30: *no*. The
market simply won't support those kinds of costs on the upper end of the
spectrum.

Again, customers may recognize that they are subsidizing more than simply the
cost of distribution, but the preparation and distribution of the ebook don't
justify an additional percentage on these scales beyond some point. I suspect
that most customers are willing to pay extra to get the ebook in addition to the
physical copy---just not, in most cases, *that* much extra.

### Aside: on reasonability and trained markets

We must recognize that markets can be *trained*. People have come to see $0.99
as a reasonable price for individual songs. There was nothing inevitable about
that outcome; it is a direct result of the success of the iTunes store. Had
prices been set at $1.49 or $0.33, it's likely we would have settled on that
number as a reasonable price. Similarly, TV show episodes sell at $1.99,[^2] and
people seem to treat that as a reasonable price: the perceived value matches the
cost well. They could have been $1 or $2.50, and consumers probably would have
settled in with those numbers equally well.

Of course, had the price been too high, we would have rejected it entirely:
markets can be trained, but they're not capable of stretching into just any
shape at all.

Admittedly, the music market remains volatile, but consumers on the whole don't
seem to balk at spending a dollar on a song. While the piracy rate remains high,
iTunes and similar markets provide an outlet for those who are interested in
purchasing their music legitimately.[^3]

This outcome results from the combination of a trained market and a sensible
cost/value relationship that allowed the training to occur in the first place.
Book publishers should aim for the same outcome: profitability on the basis of
perceived reasonability of their prices. This will require training the market,
but that is possible so long as their expectations are reasonable.

A reasonable target
-------------------

### Price points

Curtis' final suggested price point is close to the mark, but I think some
revision is in order. Remember: the aim is to buoy both customer satisfaction
*and* publisher profitability. Here's my proposed pricing scheme for fiction
(which could be adapted to other parts of the market fairly straightforwardly):

  - Standalone ebook: $4.99
  - Paperback:
      - Book: $7.99
      - Bundle: $9.99

  - Trade paperback:[^4]
      - Book: $14.99
      - Bundle: $15.99

  - Hardcover:
      - Book: $26.99
      - Bundle: $26.99

I'm basing these on the current pricing schemes in the market---these are the
normal suggested retail prices for paperbacks, trade paperbacks, and hard
covers---and on the assumption that the publisher's goal is to maximize revenue,
while the consumer's goal is to get the most content at a price he feels is
reasonable. I'm also taking into account the existing profit curves for
publishers: paperbooks are relatively low margin, while hardcovers are the major
profit points, at least when they're successful.

### Rationale

First, and most importantly, I believe the market will support these price
points. The standalone ebook is less expensive than the paperback, as it should
be, since its distribution costs are much lower than the costs of printing and
shipping paperbacks. At the same time, ebooks sales will still generate revenue
for the publisher; $5 is not a meaningless amount of money.

For each tier upwards, the cost of the bundled ebook drops. The publisher thus
acknowledges the increasing profitability of each tier as well as the increasing
cost to the reader. At the same time, the lowered bundling cost incentivizes the
user toward the higher profit items. In each case, the bundling cost is
sufficiently low as to be in the "impulse purchase" range for most users.[^5]

Readers will be far more likely to front the cost of a hardcover if an ebook
comes bundled with it, because the value proposition is so much better. At the
same time, this is unlikely to decrease the profits of the publisher, because
the margins are much higher for hardcovers.

In fact, bundling at these rates will likely increase publisher profits from
ebooks, as most readers currently choose between ebook and physical books. The
price of a hardcover is simply too high to allow for the purchase of both. (Even
when this is not actually true, it *seems* true to consumers, which is equally
important in determining their behavior.) With a sufficiently lower barrier to
getting the additional content, the likelihood that the reader purchases both
goes up substantially.[^6]

This potential for increased profitability is compounded by the availability of
the bundle at initial purchase time. A consumer who has already committed to
spending $8 on a book is unlikely to balk at $10, and even less to balk at the
transition from $15 to $16. In many cases, the publisher will earn more money
from the book purchase than before, but the reader is still getting a good deal
on the ebook. This is *exactly* the combination that makes for a flourishing
market.

Finally, the simplicity of these numbers is extremely helpful. Standardizing
these prices will decrease the friction inherent in making the purchase
decision, which increases the likelihood that a purchase will be made. I'm not
suggesting a cartel---price standardization is natural in this sort of
market---and I believe the price points I've suggested are where the market will
settle in the long run. The publishers who get there first will earn enormous
goodwill from their readers in the short term, as well as demonstrating their
leadership in the industry in ways that set them up for long term success.

Bundle up
---------

A smart approach to bundling could be enormously beneficial to the publishing
industry. In addition to the pure numerical profitability of the approach
outlined above---no small detail in an industry struggling to adapt to the
realities of the new economy---it establishes that the publishers are responsive
to customers in a way that other large media have not seemed to be. Nothing is
so helpful to a company's long-term sustainability as for consumers to *like*
it. Reasonable bundling prices would go a long way toward helping readers see
publishers as friends, rather than enemies.

Obviously these numbers work best in the context of fiction. The value
propositions are entirely different in other contexts; a cookbook is an entirely
different thing than a copy of *The Hobbit*. Across the board, though,
publishers should keep the same goals in mind: profitability by means of
reasonability and approachability. Be allies of the readers, not their enemies.
Make it easy and affordable for them to pay you for your work, and they will.

---

My thanks to [Stephen Carradini][sc] for invaluable contributions to this piece
in two forms: many long conversations about this very topic, and a helpful edit
of the actual content.


[^1]: Additionally, there is a signaling problem here: "free" suggests "low
    value" in a way that publishers rightly want to avoid. See ["iA Writer: On
    Prices and Features"][iaw], Section 2: Cost, by Oliver Richtenstein for a
    lengthy and sensible exploration of this issue. The issue of signaling value
    should be taken into account in my suggestions later, as well. But more on
    that below.

[^2]: When they sell at all, of course. I've written about this problem
    [before][piracy]: piracy explodes when there is demand without supply. It
    also tends to grow at a higher rate when the cost is perceived as
    unreasonable. TV shows priced at $5/episode wouldn't do well; they seem to
    sell quite briskly at $1.99. Publishers run the risk of fomenting piracy by
    setting their prices too high.

[^3]: I have never seen someone complain that a song is too expensive at a
    dollar who was willing to pay *anything*. A penny would be too pricey from
    the pirates' point of view.

[^4]: Trade paperbacks (TPBs) are similar in size to hardcovers, but have soft
    covers similar to those in a paperback. Fiction TPBs typically go for around
    $15. Over the last few years, publishers have started shifting away from the
    low-margin paperback market into these trade paperbacks, which provide a bit
    higher profit for them. Personally, I don't mind, because these books tend
    to be higher quality paper and bindings. If I'm sitting down with a monster
    like one of the books in <cite>The Wheel of Time</cite>, this is far and
    away the best format for a physical copy.

[^5]: On the signaling issue: the price of the ebook is sufficiently high as to
    continue to signal real value here, I think. However, in the case of other
    kinds of books, this scheme should be revisited. A complex EPUB3 with
    embedded videos or interactive content should signal that it offers a higher
    value proposition than other ebooks with a higher price point; in some
    cases, if that content is sufficiently central to the value proposition of
    the book, it might be more expensive than the physical copies.

    Similarly, a textbook might sell for $150, its ebook at $50, and the bundle
    at $165---because the cost of preparing a textbook ebook may be
    substantially higher than that of preparing a fiction ebook. Signaling
    matters, but overpricing is as much a risk here as underpricing.

[^6]: This has the added benefit of making the purchase of new books over used
    books more attractive to the consumer: if the coupon for ebook at reduced
    rate is only available at new book purchase, a $3 used book suddenly has a
    much lower value proposition relative to the original when the reader is
    interested in having an ebook copy as well, since the cost of having both is
    still $8.

    Of course, this leads us to the question of ebook resale, which is
    currently a legally murky area at best, and requires considerable
    legal and intellectual development.

[dbw]: http://www.digitalbookworld.com/2012/why-do-we-have-to-choose-between-print-and-digital/

[craigmod]: http://craigmod.com/journal/post_artifact/#section_4
    "Post Artifact Books and Publishing, Section 4: The post-artifact system" from Craig Mod"

[iaw]: http://informationarchitects.net/blog/ia-writer-on-prices-and-features/

[sc]: http://stephencarradini.com

[castle]: http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/web/no-castle-for-you
    "No Castle for you!"