Title: The End of Surfing
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-03-26 20:00
Summary: Tabbed browsers killed "surfing." You only thought it was Facebook to blame.
Tags: design, software development

Sometime in the last few months it occurred to me that I no longer "surf" the
internet. I read, to be sure, and every once in a long while I even go on a
spree where I follow links from one site to another (or just in a long trail on
Wikipedia). In general, however, I no longer surf. I suspect I am not alone in
this: if we took a straw poll I would venture that most of my friends offline
and acquaintances online alike spend rather less time in "browsing" mode than
they do reading Facebook or Twitter or Instagram. Motion from link to link has
been replaced by individual hops out onto Buzzfeed or a viral cat picture
website.[^1]

The obvious explanation for all of this is already there in what I've written:
Facebook and Twitter and all the rest of the social media web. To be sure, the
advent of social media and the increasing degree to which social media have
captured user attention on the web are a significant factor in the end of the
old surfing/browsing behavior. This is a dream come true for those social media
giants which have found ways to deliver ads to their many millions of users and
thereby turn enormous profits.

At the same time, I think there is an oft-overlooked factor in the shifting
nature of the web over the last decade: the browser. In fact, if there is any
single cause behind the death of old-fashioned surfing, I would point to Firefox
1.0: the browser which popularized tabbed browsing to increasingly large
sections of the internet-using public.[^2] The open-source browser steadily ate
away at Internet Explorer's then absurd levels of dominance, until Internet
Explorer 8 included of tabs itself. By the time that Chrome came on the scene,
tabbed browsing had long since become a given.

So why do I think that *tabbed browsing* of all things contributed to the end of
"browsing" and "surfing" as our dominant mode of reading the internet? Simply
put: it broke linearity. Previously,[^3] one's experience of the web was single-
stranded, leaping from one point to another in a line that however contorted was
always connected by the forward and backward buttons on the browser. The moment
tabbed browsing came on the scene, that line was broken. Following a link might
mean it opened in a new tab instead of moving the whole view forward to it.

Surfing as I remember it in the late &rsquo;90s and early &rsquo;00s was
inherently the experience of getting lost along that timeline, finding myself
dozens of links along the chain and wondering how I had ended up there, and then
being able to trace my way back. With tabs, that traceability was gone. With it
went the inherent tension that we faced with every link: to follow, or not? To
get sucked down into *this* vortex or *that*? Because in all likelihood, we
knew, we were not going to be coming back to this page. With tabs, though, I
could open both of those pages without ever leaving this one. I could start new
journeys without ending the old. But there was a hidden cost: that newly opened
tab had no history. It was a clean slate; before that newly opened link there
was only a blank page. If I closed the original from which I had opened it,
there was no going back.[^4] If I closed this new tabs, there was no going
forward to them. The line was broken.

From there it was only a short step to the idea of a single site being the
center from which one ventured out to other points on the web before returning:
the Facebooks and Twitters of the world. In some sense, Facebook's entire model
is predicated on the idea that it is natural to open a new tab with that juicy
Buzzfeed content while keeping Facebook itself open in a background tab. Would
it work in that old linear model? Sort of. Would it feel natural? Never.

All of this because of tabs. Invention's most significant results are rarely
those the minds behind it expect. When we are designing things---whether a piece
of furniture or a piece of the web---we have to remember that design decisions
all have repercussions that we may not see. Technology is never neutral.
Particular innovations may or may not be *morally* significant, but they always
produce changes in people's behavior. Design has consequences.

[^1]: For the record, lots of that hopping from link to link was on Buzzfeed-
    like and viral-cat-picture-like sites, too. I am not concerned with the
    *kind* of content being read here, so much as the way it is being read.

[^2]: Note that I am not crediting Firefox 1.0 with *creating* the tabbed
    browser---only with popularizing it. That distinction matters.

[^3]: Excepting having multiple browser windows open, which I am sure people
    did---but to a much lesser extent.

[^4]: Yes, yes, browser history and re-open closed tab commands. But the
    *experience* of those is different, and that's what we're talking about
    here.