Title: iPad vs. Kindle
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-04-30 21:20

I've been a happy owner of both a Kindle and an iPad Mini for the last several
months, and it occurred to me tonight that I use them *very* similarly in some
ways. Both are primarily reading devices for me. What is different is the kinds
of material I read on each.[^1]

[^1]: I also use the iPad for a number of other things: App.net and Twitter and
    so on, [Paper](http://www.fiftythree.com), starting some ideas for blog
    posts, etc. But mainly I read on it!

My Kindle is a first generation Paperwhite, in fairly good condition. (It has
one significant quirk in that it sometimes turns on without the power button
being pushed. Alas.) I use it nearly every day right now. I have most of my
school books on it, and several of my favorite novels. I'm rereading Patrick
Rothfuss' _The Wise Man's Fear_ right now, and so I spend a good half a hour a
day on the Kindle for that alone. I also get a lot of my seminary reading done
on the device.

On the iPad, on the other hand, I read a lot of web pages, nearly all via
[Instapaper](https://www.instapaper.com). I had sometimes had Instapaper items
delivered to my Kindle, and that worked *fairly* well, but I much prefer the
experience of using the app on the iPad. I opt to do pretty much any technical
reading on the device: its screen just works much better for dealing with things
like code samples embedded in a blog post---not least because I can scroll
easily if I need to! I also do basically all my Bible reading on the iPad. It is
far easier to navigate to different parts of the text, switch translations (or
original languages!) while keeping my place there on any of the top-tier iPad
apps than on the Kindle. And I sometimes read comics on the iPad---something I
would not try in a million years on the current Kindle screen!

A friend asked a few months ago if I thought one would obviate the other. Given
the qualification that neither is in any sense truly a *necessity*---we could
quite easily get along without either---my answer after several months with both
is *no*. Though the devices are similar in a number of ways, they fit into very
different niches. The things I actively enjoy on each are very different. The
Kindle is good for much longer-form reading, and its lack of distractions is
nice (though I often take advantage of the Do Not Disturb mode on the iPad when
I actually want to accomplish things besides talking on social media). The iPad
is better for anything with color, for technical documents, and for anything
where navigation more complex than one-page-after-another is important. I would
not particularly want to read a novel on it, though!

I will be curious to see if the devices converge at some point in the
future.[^2] At present, no technology gives both the responsiveness and
gorgeous color of the iPad *and* the low-contrast, pleasant long-form reading
experience offered by the Kindle's e-ink. If at some point we get a technology
that does both, it will be pretty amazing. In the meantime... we still have
pretty amazing pieces of technology, and I enjoy them both a lot.

[^2]: No, Amazon's Kindle Fire series of tablets are nothing like that
    convergence: they are *functionally* just poor-man's-iPads hooked into
    Amazon's ecosystem. Note that I'm not making a comment about the quality or
    lack thereof on the devices---only that they're much reduced in
    capabilities compared to an iPad or Android (e.g. Nexus 7).